

::: section "chapter" "The Gap Between the Two: Glenn Lowry and Will Rawls in Conversation" "chapter"

# The Gap Between the Two: Glenn Lowry and Will Rawls in Conversation


During Glenn Lowry’s tenure as director at the Museum of Modern Art,
which began in 1995, the museum has acquired more than twenty pieces by
Robert Rauschenberg. The most momentous acquisition, and also the most
vexed, was that of Canyon (1959), one of the artist’s most celebrated
Combines, in 2012. After the death of Canyon’s original owner, dealer
Ileana Sonnabend, in 2007, the artwork faced years of legal strife due
to the stuffed bald eagle affixed to its canvas. Since bald eagles are
endangered and therefore illegal to buy or sell, Sonnabend’s heirs found
themselves with an artwork of tremendous value—and with a
correspondingly high tax burden—that no one could legally purchase.
Eventually, the work was gifted to MoMA. Choreographer Will Rawls speaks
with Lowry, whose contribution to Value Talks was a lecture on the
subject delivered before Canyon, about the museum’s acquisition of this
paradoxically priceless artwork, its relationship to the production of
institutional narratives, and MoMA’s treatment of other works that
resist commonplace notions of value.

will rawls On a personal level—and as an art historian, not just as the
director of the museum—what is Canyon’s particular value to you?

glenn lowry Canyon is a remarkable work. First of all, it is a
reflection of a friendship that Rauschenberg had with Sari Dienes,
another artist who actually found the eagle that became the centerpiece
of the work. It’s a haunting meditation on the Greek myth of Ganymede:
Zeus assumes the form of an eagle in order to abduct the beautiful
mortal Ganymede, because he wants a boy to serve as a cupbearer on
Olympus. It’s one of Rauschenberg’s early Combines—objects that are
neither painting nor sculpture but that result from bringing objects
into contact with two-dimensional surfaces. It’s hauntingly beautiful.
And, as one of Rauschenberg’s most important works, Canyon has a story
to tell that goes beyond its own iconography. It has this immediate
impact as a singular, iconic, definitive object. Canyon is valuable to
us at MoMA because it expands the story that the museum can tell about
Rauschenberg. And, ironically, it happens to be valueless from a
financial point of view.

::: image 151014_onvalue-text-press-272d-web-resources/image/Lowry_RapeofGanymede.png

Fig. 4

wr Can you talk about the work’s valuelessness and its relationship to
the acquisition?

gl Canyon is legendary because the taxidermied eagle that Dienes found
in a pawnshop and gave to Rauschenberg is an endangered species. As the
painting’s importance grew, so did its economic value; but because it’s
illegal to profit from the sale of an endangered species, and Canyon
contains the body of a bald eagle, the work couldn’t be sold. Canyon was
owned by the legendary art dealer Ileana Sonnabend, who was a very early
supporter of Rauschenberg. She bought the work in 1959 from a show at
her former husband Leo Castelli’s gallery. When she died, the painting
was part of her estate. The IRS valued it at sixty-five million dollars.
But the United States Fish and Wildlife Service said, “If you sell the
painting in order to pay your taxes, you will have committed a felony
and we’ll prosecute.”

Sonnabend’s heirs were going to have to pay taxes on a
sixty-five-million-dollar work of art—but to give away, buy, or sell the
work was illegal. The estate executors said, “This just doesn’t make any
sense. Either the painting is worth sixty-five million dollars, in which
case we will consider selling it or giving it away and taking a tax
benefit, or it’s worth zero, because to sell it would be a felony.” The
Sonnabend family and its lawyers went to work. They said to the Fish and
Wildlife Service, “Will you allow us to give Canyon to a museum—to put
it into the public trust—without charging us with a felony?” And Fish
and Wildlife said, “Yes, we would be willing to do that.” Then the
Sonnabends’ lawyers went to the IRS and said, “If we give the work to a
museum, will you zero out its value so that we don’t have to pay taxes
on it?” The IRS agreed, and MoMA was the beneficiary. We’ve been so
dedicated to Rauschenberg’s work: Canyon joins Rebus, Bed, the Black
Mountain paintings, and Overdrive, the great colored silk screen.

::: image (data:image/jpg;base64,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)

Fig. 5

wr How do you see Canyon functioning in the museum in the future?

gl The way a museum presents art changes over time because the issues
that are important to us change, but you still want to have a series of
iconic works around which you can galvanize a conversation. Canyon is
one of many such remarkable works at MoMA, and it enables the museum to
expand the stories we can tell not just about Rauschenberg but about all
that was going on in the late 1950s and 1960s, which enriches the
relationship between Rauschenberg and Cy Twombly and Jasper Johns. This
work also tells a story about Rauschenberg’s own son, which is
complicated, given Rauschenberg’s life.

wr When he made Canyon, he’d just recently had a divorce and taken a
lover. His family life is present in Canyon in such a literal way: The
photograph of his son affixed to the canvas seems to be such a valuable
part of Rauschenberg’s past. It makes me think of the difficulty of
preserving one’s past so literally and symbolically in a dance. Of
course, all dancing is reliant on the past inasmuch as it requires
training, which takes time. But in dance, that past is rendered into the
present in a particular, ephemeral way; the present is such a fleeting
place to encounter yourself.

::: image (data:image/jpg;base64,/9j/7QAsUGhvdG9zaG9wIDMuMAA4QklNA+0AAAAAABAAlgAAAAEAAQCWAAAAAQAB/+4AJkFkb2JlAGQAAAAAAQMAEAMDBgkAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAFAAJJRP/bAIQAAgICAgICAgICAgMCAgIDBAMDAwMEBQQEBAQEBQUFBQUFBQUFBQcICAgHBQkKCgoKCQwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAEDAgIDAwMHBQUHDQsJCw0PDQ0NDQ8PDAwMDAwPDwwMDAwMDA8MDg4ODg4MERERERERERERERERERERERERERER/8IAEQgARgBpAwERAAIRAQMRAf/EAMsAAAEFAQEBAQEAAAAAAAAAAAYEBQcICQMCAQAKAQEAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAEAABBAIBAwMEAwEAAAAAAAADAQIEBQAGEhEUByEiE2AyJBVCIxYXEQACAQIEAwUDBwoHAAAAAAABAgMAESExEgRBEwVRYXEiMoGRI6Gx0eFSkhTwwUJywtIzkzQGIPFi4kMVNRIBAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAYBMBAQACAgIBAwMFAAAAAAAAAREAITFBUWFxEIGhYJGx8MHR4fH/2gAMAwEAAhADEAAAAMgAzCcajyKS2Rt0MIADwPQ6mXZm+WIAYsUQYRsWzNtRERyJySD6VcMLSxxZkREAlbS+xsQdQFB8NQsKomHBec0HM2QUKfmkhrqfgPBkMhaQwZSmj5IpSQr2UzNPDWk8AqNgoCoq6Z2lxCvoqIuKfmjpqudxjGk7D4R0fzoB6JgOCANTScvqOYwHoRHUbzP0lkayawgJpBALT4DZxEQsGUSEtCsUHY4AiLzyNA2jQdhiP//aAAgBAgABBQH6+//aAAgBAwABBQH6+//aAAgBAQABBQEqL3cWK9FNAOwX6W0Ro6q2eeIhI8zQHLY7m4Y2ZMAq4wfHGQnOZDhd0cz3xYP6wmVEBZdrPYeOQw5on1uuITVVSaIxHdxbeOY7ibb/ABcJzyH5qgVTtqYiMDcuatZ28bKb5XSYRWuLrOi1W10+4Cha/Rh7IGMKhLTxfGUu3dXcip75LUfjFHkJG8ZSDUHYEzX4yKzT9AJsWa1r2nigWlByKyySrDXu5TPDjHrbxiIVETrhQ/ksD0KxB9Zfvi9xXZp9DCysmS6KVDeyLTki0syVYRvmJWJ7vCLvjlteitVURjht5EaTAna0vP5E/KzVJVLUFXeqmFEN5D0SXIBtGtmDbWYgBo2sI3xTTm7mOqqjk6hN0c1Ue9EEqEEJWJ/mpWDLKkSqqimWxJUjs5UkHdOi66c2V2jbE+08U0d4OYD2Y3moiG6o0nwtV3xv6OUfcWma94rrZlYTw0Hh/wADrByS+NaidNk+L9XkTJsGKVIYXBlPRERObInFHPJ6oYiINSJw7jNV+FKpvXPXE64nXDfYPhyD6u9vbr0z15u+wqC4f0Z//9oACAECAgY/AX3/2gAIAQMCBj8Bff/aAAgBAQEGPwGawxaRsO+9CObas51Yi4GIwxNDVsmRMPSyuoH3u/O9cxdjIU5nJuLW19l70NvHsJZdwzaAiWJLdmdRrPEYSVYkNhhpONdDebyvFtYXjbQLnkvnmuNlIpzGvKZibnjj4k0iu7Y3NrYDtxopiY0ONzkK5oVVj7ScxTbiJTGIE5ZYGwc5hfZW+3E2LbOFnHe1ibW8cvGv6uT7kf7tNoXUUnS1yqi5bVjq4WFFJNnAQXI5kki6HPq0302Nu/wponRI7IGCQm/lOWr89b/+49113/r4unTrt4IU5cryPuMGDIG1A3tgRljU67JyyxG8bNdeYtgcBTtKixNpIAU3VWEZ/K1dA0XDR7aTVhhhIzW91N2sPz1GzeqVGvfLG4p9VlsLdmXCo1BZlxz8ThUo4Xy78K6gQly0SkpbHAjMWr+ig931UxjezPMbjt0gnKo4d3LoLNr5jedRmbFGB7c663NDuo+nttZB+D3Mq6pJAguxa5GHAi+fhXQf7T2Lxz9U2sh33VpojqvumUKIw+NtCn5O+mnefVKsRnijjAa5I84cC2kinkTyq8smWVsq2IDDQkG4UW4HV7v0cKCciS2kfF8ui/Z6r/JUajHSKtjdjqFhxrSTpa+HYe6pkvoJsR2cPoqd3W6GNif1Stmr/k93++vxMm4WEXc453xFS9S6luD03oWxHM3G6kGm68BGlsTnjkO/Ko16dtNyNntZTJFHvHZmZlb+JpPacbfJXVZNnuRyoNx8XsPmN2ObYMMcamG60yxwxS6IlAuG0+prgXveoeGot7zW13sULzAGRXUAtZPMS1lBPZSkLIgBv8SMp7bNY07HDSPlrmA2I8wN+IyqMm10bH/OhyxwzqRcSDAQR+kRkbe+v4Oy/ln6K2e03TqkjNGEYqWkM5SFragDpAZsDjjiQcql6Tu9peLqMcqxQandpQt9R1Oo83st89Tz7qeboETKzE7vQjovA6XviBUkvTd1Pudvsg+rezrZtziOYVOBvwsuWYteuoKl5ptEr858RfgMsQAKDKcoifeMK2haXRHy57LxMraVtfwvVx9m3torkFxY9p7K13DAG1icfZXlQWvqtdcaVJRZ1x0UjhFuQwH3cPlr/wAHdfyR+5Txbjruz6bu42likben0mRyFY8vzE+W4Jy771+Gn321efbxNuImXdLEzRkX13ld/UcrUm53LRrvJUcF9cm4j9NxznZWN9R4W91PJL1fpomNhyzMX0C1rkGxZjpua3EO33Kcx45GAPmY3HA+kDDvrfoYXedIohC6+lTrsdXsrYJu5pNi+2hl3cVgGZ9LxCxGoYHV9VC+SmpHEgfU+Olg2GfCvIrSFfsxlv2bUPgMlvtoq/tCg1wB5QLVHc28+I7jh299ese+m3K7tBvXYFzPchtA0nVn6sqk3O4UFoJdGVo9SAH0WtYX8KSLnQb2TaxOok2yiVULfa5iyIe8fNWucw7Vz5f6cQEsO1Et81WfcLDuGUcuNw5lIONwi5D9a1beHpKBt1uV1xo14vh6dReRnsoW2N+8VJv+sbX8NPFBLtkEvrYu0Tmwwy5VaCMvn4mvhXV5HNyLDIZ051Mz6cfyvQ8oa+ffel4DXfHxFM4kCaLgX7sa/i7P7z1tNiYI3lBYSb0i0pDvqPmFP0/bz8rp+8j0biVW0yAEaSEtiLr2e2uZF1HR0zazJNBso4RebSwYrM7NgoyAXxNbvcdS6dDu3mXyTjyvqYi57iAtqh3cXT4dnebm7pYwfjC2KgE2F+OFLIdrCZEURq2gBljGSKbZd1TPZUi0hVvnYYUbYtkKbNTrGOOValYaQMbA39mNDSwq4x0C+PgtSK2evgcfTfh4V6j7/rrb8qxkx127f8Umq/8Aqzy9lC1hFw7Kb8MO3m6cqFscOFqjMg8wXLgVthep7cUa9uA01OSxteLUON8aym94+iv/2gAIAQIDAT8Q/X3/2gAIAQMDAT8Q/X3/2gAIAQEDAT8QbfTA62ZUmC3rAqCCvpyIIWVCB0rXyMKsB7aRWpNO3g7ccYmtDYA3402YQfkWNeeU1rz1lqgi02bLgsXwbUyZ7ghXsov8jNeMR6BKism8WqS4FOPA78YKSQHlG+F7mD1iRRMBSIFZ25UZBDHfKDoctn0DI4sxY1chCDr24NAKRAQJQJ4b7ax0ucpEq2ZPhl4pdiHdUQHcUke5ScmkRoo0BxR41VAIaqU0u/3wKSu0o+EIrvi+sfElQ9jW7jFVC1oAw41DCsV1F23I1Krq4UwIFJEoh4nhwa7aTm8L/P3xxToeVFU1zrP+dwiS/wBjIk2u9z1mhayV624EaVBhqrgCijWzVpRMtue5Oe/CN9QUBh5OLB9YR1px3erOiYuwgK5bo7ZPvkMf6qW9o7AUPC4JtsACocp5cNJEQe48X7ZUXCBRCsVSW/OO1FSrRWiO3enDwgJsoU2+sB2VM2qpqoW/QJcLbozjTlFvGbvW3YwVChSpo5Yopgo0ofSQHcY91ASNNVUqNVvckzkdA0Ox7xt0NCZRoISalHnXvIgyNBGtShh2XW8hRwtuuBQPZ1gtu0DzXok9YAmwijc6a0kMvLiVOL7TZhdSKj41ZecUsJGLSAOFY+ioJVpiBQzhaBWJiEMrFIVYCrAIfhOvnJNUF84/jBHlUqpsAEohTZAOr/VbVKeUebOcRmHZd05R20wQpdEAoPRSoA2w85KsCvmOd4HmwcnIQONbrKZE5KznHbNrQJuhA895qiuAunismEpRlljUPwLcmC28v1kljYaXlwBvLaBQok1I2aAYMHeso1pehewfBkEzJPc8LC/J2SclF+hHsAnls5zcjDWQdlCNTvnG6c7PG0C26eu2LOqKTlLaYM68ggVQTNwybZFhMnS/yYdKoBmG+rT4M6jKnsoG3lwXiKDVttPLP/Kf5wnzZ86PVAUM0+MvRbFGQZcGgPTI0qqFV4YViJvlTNrqoNUUALedFx0WKiXUmQqqHjeNeatsST3Ieg24zw+UQ5ABcpp1FMuql8t2o0fbjCUEWFVWttNOIIClM3oZw6zfmyB30c+t/jND2oFaAo35xcgdGmqONxvWf1L/AHx2shExnbQn7IYi+spCEANAdq4v82reTGojTycZq/qEk1kBVR5Y5xlCO0EE0BERYDHCCHXYQCgoQIGazGgmjCjAZA9YAEZoeeTBR8KDRVOmPcwG3stQHo/NxxINF3w7NJDRgMm4qqlG79ORzxEQh3Lp2Osn/TwKBy+BLdY9dYPUzj1mjYyZzX/eRSxqDys/LrKhj+aB1JdPvFiKS3bryzzxiFAQqc+j2PGDwCYU0PFrid2+8mBINVe139veDZ9AO1bU5vj+PpL/AP/Z)

Fig. 6

gl I think that one of the things museums, especially modern and
contemporary ones, do is create a kind of performative space that
invites a diverse public to have experiences in common, however
differently people may ultimately read those experiences. By dislocating
dance from its conventional location—the stage—to an unconventional
one—a gallery or an atrium in a museum—you immediately change the
relationship between the dancer and his or her audience. There’s no
distance anymore. You also change how the audience understands
choreography and the performance: It’s no longer dance; it’s art of some
sort.

wr However, even in museums viewers sometimes impose a distance between
themselves and the performance. When people stand back “to get a better
view,” a certain theater-like distance is reintroduced. But it’s also
true that these experiences, however mediated, cannot as easily be fixed
in narratives as object-based works, which poses a challenge for MoMA
inasmuch as it is tasked with crafting narratives about
twentieth-century art. And yet you’ve resisted the idea that MoMA is
responsible for creating and maintaining these dominant narratives. Why?

gl Our role is to think about the artist and the works of art we find
most interesting, not to present them as part of some dominant
narrative. A single institution doesn’t establish a canon, unless that
institution is the papacy. Canons get established—and broken down—by
consensus, by people debating what’s important. I prefer to think of
what we do as making propositions. The fact that, in the course of the
twentieth century, many of the propositions we made were adopted as
dominant narratives speaks to the way in which we argued for those
propositions. It does not mean that the narratives are fixed and will
last forever.

I hope that we’ve created an institution that’s supple. Yes, we want to
make an argument. And we want to make it in the affirmative: “We believe
that this is an interesting way to see something.” But we don’t want to
make arguments like, “This is the only way to see this,” or, “These are
the only objects that are really important,” or, “These are the only
histories that matter.” I don’t believe we ever intended to do that, and
I certainly don’t believe we intend to now.

What makes art interesting for the public is the existence of competing
narratives. Today, MoMA is just one of many major museums of modern art.
We can’t do everything. Much of what we don’t do is at least as
important as what we do. I’m more comfortable thinking about what we do
as making propositions to be criticized, changed, elaborated, refined,
abandoned, and revived over time.

wr During your talk, MoMA associate director Kathy Halbreich said
something to the effect of “Maybe it’s OK for a museum to lose its
narrative.” It sounds like a tension you have to be vigilant about—the
tension between advancing and discarding narratives. Given the nature of
MoMA as an authoritative platform, how do you say that you believe in
something but also invite criticism?

gl There’s always an impression from the outside that MoMA is somehow a
monolithic enterprise: Everybody agrees with each other, we’re not
self-critical, and we speak from on high like we got ten tablets from
the Moses of art history. We didn’t get ten tablets! We got five hundred
tablets, and they came in pieces, and we’ve been trying to assemble
them, and every time we think we’ve achieved some kind of order they
fall apart and we have to reassemble them. We’re actually really
interested in what other people think. When I use the word narrative, I
mean that we are telling stories—not the story. Each generation adds
value to the institution by defining the set of stories it wishes to
pursue. Of course, that means excluding certain stories. You make a
commitment to doing something at the expense of not doing something
else. Another way of creating value is choosing what to do and what not
to do.

wr I’m thinking about context and circulation in relation to the museum:
The most convincing reason for Canyon’s placement at MoMA is not its
pricelessness but the need for it to circulate. How does circulation
factor into the question of the value of a work of art?

gl A work like Canyon is always in circulation, even within the museum.
Sometimes it’ll be seen in a gallery with other works by Rauschenberg,
sometimes it’ll be seen in a gallery with other works owned by Ileana
Sonnabend, sometimes it’ll be seen in a gallery with other works from
the late 1950s and early 1960s. The moment you start to think of an
artwork as being fixed or defined, you diminish its value.

::: image(data:image/jpg;base64,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)

Fig. 7

wr An art-conservator friend of mine often talks about the principle of
“inherent vice” in her field, which is when the very nature of an
object—the fundamental instability of its components—causes it to
deteriorate. One example is a relic made from human remains, like a
Tibetan skull bowl. Dance and choreography can be characterized by
inherent vice, too, because they are made of human material. Yet the
ephemerality of performance is also what can make dance valuable. How do
you think the conservation or circulation of dance might contribute to
its value?

gl Objects also dance in the museum, although usually at a much slower
rate than a dancer. Actually, I think we’re at our best when most of the
works we have are moving around, sometimes on and sometimes off view.
Absence becomes fascinating in circulation.

wr Having the freedom to move, I think, is one of the most definitive
aspects of being a spectator at a museum. What are your own trajectories
through MoMA like? What do you experience as a body moving through the
space?

gl I enjoy walking through almost any museum, in part because that’s how
you experience art—by moving to see something—but also because I like
the sense of getting lost. And space changes: The dimensions of a room,
the aperture of a doorway, the presence of natural light—all of these
things send very subtle physical cues to you; they change how you feel
about looking at something. One of the things we try to do in the
circuit through the museum is to ensure that it’s very hard not to
engage natural light almost all the time: windows, apertures into the
atrium, views of the garden, views of Fifty-Third or Fifty-Fourth
Street—you haven’t entered a sealed box.

::: image (data:image/jpg;base64,/9j/7QAsUGhvdG9zaG9wIDMuMAA4QklNA+0AAAAAABAAlgAAAAEAAQCWAAAAAQAB/+4AJkFkb2JlAGQAAAAAAQMAEAMDBgkAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAFAAJJRP/bAIQAAgICAgICAgICAgMCAgIDBAMDAwMEBQQEBAQEBQUFBQUFBQUFBQcICAgHBQkKCgoKCQwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAEDAgIDAwMHBQUHDQsJCw0PDQ0NDQ8PDAwMDAwPDwwMDAwMDA8MDg4ODg4MERERERERERERERERERERERERERER/8IAEQgASwB4AwERAAIRAQMRAf/EAL0AAAMAAgMBAQAAAAAAAAAAAAMEBQIGAAEHCAkBAQAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAQAAEEAgMAAQQDAAAAAAAAAAABAgMEEQUSEwYUcCMVCBAhIhEAAQMCBAEKBAUFAAAAAAAAAQACAxEEITESBRMQQVFhcSIyM0OjgZGhFFCxQmMGUqIjNBUSAQAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAHATAQACAgEDAwQDAQAAAAAAAAEAESExQVFhoXGB0RCRscFw8PEg/9oADAMBAAIQAxAAAAD9YjE4FGRkOMmZwGAFSUa6bgYnQQYDjY0YmBgKihNI5tZ0cMww0UB8ADACYgTyabKZGRkGHCwUwJgKE08OLwM9DMDEMFKhZNgBghUkn5VmyH0sdkgSKxRDG4G8AxUUJh86mhG3noIInjoMaKpXACRMNZPCjz8GffxJJZGJZwolEyGBYTIRFFT2M10mCYmPhS2PjBwOABmAqRgAEVGTsvlApBxwzFjI/9oACAECAAEFAfot/9oACAEDAAEFAfot/9oACAEBAAEFAVQwYEQRBEEQ4mP5UcPQlaKhgwcREEQRDiYMCijh5IhgwYMCIIgxhwFYcBWjmjkHoOQwcTicREGtI2HAWM6x0Y9hs/Y6ij6f0G4qee1us2dDd63BI7qjgc+RJXdMUHORqosbKnKWNGCsQ4DmkjUPV6Cff/sj+yvybPhvDU3a/wAMkFM21erNqtRrKFK1u6dWzp9VrNbSl3Wuq3a+mqV6VFq1hfiipUHfDJHUSPV+Wq+09jrvJz2KjNNVocJFHtRGxf4JHqrK8/Amtq5te65sfznYdfcO2Dx+wepYvyYlmsfk/QLZtuWe0yJ1aVR8D2isVqzSYOxwj1cMkXHYo1OR1OVFrzOHU3jtYzlNqqj1/FwtSexwH3OIt2VyuszHyZ1d3zDZ5VGTvOxyplyn9KIzA5iZ6mqdCEvUP6cs6uCdR9nK9Q3q5N6sx9YzrPt84+GHdeV6xOvl/9oACAECAgY/ARb/2gAIAQMCBj8BFv/aAAgBAQEGPwH8Wy5bH+IiZr94ljiu7uN+pot7OZ3DjlDqUc50ha3SMaGpwU243rh3XCG3g1aX3Ny/CK3jr+p5wCs922u6jvdvv4xLDNHi1wyNKgZEEckkunVw26qBO1NaHNNO6atNRXCvanyltQwVR1R6HMcWuANRUddAnP0F2nm+ia9zAx1SCAajA0wNByZ8nMsx81/Hfs7oWcO1bVb3O6SRnvvhtQJ2xvGWl73Rtqtv22wZFPf7pu/EiicceHZWtxc3Dg4EFumNtSV/DLKThMlt9kstYjAY2roWv8PT3seteWtxt2xulM0Do9DHmNx1YGjwRRboyCJ32srrd8Rkkc84RaH5uPOFuNtE1zZZ4gxpjJDhVzakGvQtyjhZJ9vLO2Zglc52nVG0OAqeltVbxM4jAyYSO4L3NJ0g0BxFQobYivBLg0ucXHSTqFSSSTivA1YxNXgaq8NuCNWM+S3TfIrZ3/Z3G2bDcSmR5a6JujSzRXTQaRTBS31/FJLNe7Vc7Q1vEPCiiuPMdGzJr3ZF2dMFYW2p1xHawRQiWY1kc1jQ0FxAFTQdCxJCcHGtUcxVOBNahOxzKADssU3Hkz5OtHM9ikuKnHBRZkNKDQ92DaKtK1/pIWLHLwO+RRbyYnNdhWaPdJ58F3WOB7Cj/jK74a0dbgi4vZ8Kn8gu8HuPUA3813LRh6OIS76YBaXHryXjLfojpkfhz1XnP+ZWMr6dqwe7HAYoVldmOdYuI+Kwca9pXix7Tihhln0qtKrAY/RUNCsqBHys/wBXFR/1/eR8nPm4qPk+6j5HvI+X4ebi0Xo5/ur0vc+qd5Xw4lF6eX7lEPLy5uJVHyv716Xx4i9H3F6fuVX/2gAIAQIDAT8Q/hb/2gAIAQMDAT8Q/hb/2gAIAQEDAT8QvvEcQq6h930Mc0S3iAKxKSokEJTLjVw8tZnDV/XOz/hsdai+SKIIdwQOYqJHwlZ6YRbDliYl61MlVEZxK5snYlMtudEF9JpNJMxLKxmGJFvUXFV4qbZtB8I+wMxqYIQ5VSBYUAlXJjlQLibhjVLFIbxjYw66v1JciKLOodIjGpLAAKA6EZKvgYxYZc0ZzL7iRC2BkbzjEuoAUMWqAvNFu43kMs5krYWYwQQLD3ZxAe5HBqsdyHWUe5B3Zvo+ZmeAC2dusFhvBqPB2s0DbDbGkOYI4SMnW2KepZ5mLjjlV/cBSeCFLIMFbHiZdmU/cNClArcctgfaYBwGWAy/EzVoyjqwyKQhXLLh4cXTxM/madVGhiqqpcBzWd/mNX+R8x935vmApkaYZhHXu454gqgnQ7Awc3NT5mr1WjA5A0xKawqFQRoLQXHQDun4ilakrimG1UAFXutRCwqSNlbQ2c0Ve4jbK3SEDYGt9Y2KWzoxAI62ZjBBROjqMJaa7YFVINpEheIQnQ5vmEOSWOXL4mDMKN8nWEFBDVi69GXWHxhfmdaebQ/UFMoma1R8wQw4S8/5OILYzsNEGOgF+8KgLPMsnFwyd7wXzBqk9PsZIcL+o48qQwm9Cb8LF7BtH+k8w+cToH0WviK3cmD68j2imqonULlTFnpl68QMrYZKL1i9y22nRyW8tXKwsOL69mU2J0B1f3lfUbL0F85g8E31o33mSGMYCzo5gNLciqOxtm9UzDoP7JZoSmjcQmpF04hEinJk9us3PQGl9icrxu+a5nevf+iaXDfVeOubmfscflHume74mWmFPua3mfOsON95/RrGOmVt8jvf6mU4Uu/Bzce4/wCrxU02Nvb7Xn1nI/O8TVwtrlviZPOufBP/2Q==)

Fig. 8

If you work at a museum, your goal is to ensure that the widest possible
audience over the longest possible period of time has the opportunity to
see, think about, enjoy, and understand artworks. With performances that
are by definition ephemeral, the challenge is: How do you ensure that an
audience that wasn’t present for the performance gets an opportunity to
see and think about it? No two performances can ever be the same,
whether by degradation or improvement. What mark is made on an audience
member’s inner being by a dance? What are the constitutive elements of
that mark? What do you need for that to happen? Is it enough to just
talk about it? Do you have to see it? Does it need to be documented? How
does it get amplified and known by people who weren’t there? We live in
a culture that wants to document everything, so we have this hunger for
the visual and the recorded, but sometimes the myth of an event can be
as important as the event itself.

wr I love that there is no easy answer. Subsequent generations of
choreographers and art historians must take apart and stitch together
that myth again and again.

gl What’s important to me is that events become parts of conversations.
The ultimate measure of the value of an event is that it resonates to
such a degree that it becomes part of an ongoing conversation—it’s
debated, critiqued, refined, and elaborated on. The event lives because
we talk about it; language becomes crucial to how we know about such
things.

wr Absolutely. During Fred Moten and Kevin Beasley’s Value Talks event,
Fred identified a paradoxical claim that he explores in relation to
black studies: “I had no price but they bought me.” This comment is an
indictment of slavery. But it also articulates a broader resistance to
the act of putting a price on anything—people especially, but also their
work. Do you, or does MoMA, have a stake in this formulation of value?

gl Of course we do, whether we want to or not. We transact all the time.
Through acquisitions, through modes of display. You choose a mode of
display, and obviously you exclude other opportunities. So of course we
are as complicit as any institution in that process. There’s no way out
of that box. Every decision comes at the cost of other decisions you
don’t make. When you define something, you do it by exclusion as well as
by inclusion.

wr By making a choice, you foreclose on another choice, in terms of
selecting artists—is that what you mean?

gl I’m speaking about the inclusion of ideas, the inclusion of artists,
and the inclusion of publics to the highest degree possible. At the end
of the day, that doesn’t mean you are inclusive. Some people may never
want to go to a museum. There’s nothing you can do about that, other
than hope that you could welcome them if they did. A great deal of art
is made, and very little of it will ever be seen in any one museum. The
act of deciding is an exclusionary process. I’m highly aware of that. I
think Fred’s point is really apt. I agree with him.

wr Fred talks about the act of refusal—about producing dissonance within
a value system—and how that dissonance might begin to produce new ways
of looking, participating, and, ultimately, being. I assume it’s your
hope that MoMA might become as much a home for dissonance as it is a
home for sense-making.

gl Of course. If all we do is present what has been culturally accepted,
then we are not coming close to fulfilling our mission. Working with
Ralph is so interesting because he has a very generous spirit and gentle
manner, but he also has a rigorously intellectual way of looking at the
world. He was able to include in Value Talks an awful lot of people that
needed to be in conversation with the museum, and I hope that will
continue.

:::
